Express Release: Docs and site changes (#64)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: docs/express-vs-core.qmd

In January 2024, we introduced Shiny Express as a second syntax option.
Express is built on top of Core, and is designed to be extremely easy to write, while preserving most of the power and flexibility of Shiny.

## Differences between Express and Core

The major differences between Shiny Express and Core are the following:

- Slightly different import statements
- Different organization of UI and server code
- Implicit vs. explicit placement of outputs
- Different syntax for UI containers

Let's examine each of these in more detail.

### Import statements

A Shiny Core app file usually contains an import statement like:

```python
from shiny import App, reactive, render, ui
```

In Shiny Express, you'll instead see:

```python
from shiny import reactive
from shiny.express import input, render, ui
```

Note that both import `ui` and `render`, but from different places.
While Express's `shiny.express.ui` has almost all of the same UI functions as Core's `shiny.ui`, their function signatures often differ slightly, to reflect Express's different usage patterns.

> And the `render` functions---well actually, they are identical right now, but we're planning to add some Express-specific features to the `shiny.express.render` versions in the near future.

Reviewer: I would cut this line as it'll become out of date, and the user doesn't really care that they're implemented the same way. Many of the `express.ui` functions are also re-exports.

Reviewer 2: I planned to change this line when we change that functionality.

Meanwhile, the `reactive` module is unchanged between Core and Express, as the two modes share the same reactive foundations.

Finally, notice that Express also imports `input` from `shiny.express`.
This isn't needed in Core, because the `input` object is passed into the server function as an argument.
Since Express has no server function, we made it an attribute of `shiny.express`.

### Organization of UI and server code

**Every Shiny Core app file has a UI section, and a server section;** the two are separate and distinct.

The UI section consists of a single (potentially very long and deeply nested) expression, stored as a variable named `app_ui` by convention.

> The object this produces is actually straight up HTML, which is sent to the browser when it first loads the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The object this produces is actually simple HTML, which is sent to the browser when it first loads the app.
```

This function contains render functions and reactive functions, which are used to update the UI in response to user input.

You can think of the UI section as a template, with `ui.output_xx()` calls as placeholders for outputs, and the server section as the instructions for how to populate those outputs.

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
# Core
from shiny import ui, render, reactive, App
from datetime import datetime

app_ui = ui.page_fixed(
    ui.h1("Title"),
    ui.output_code("greeting"),
)

def server(input, output, session):
    @reactive.Calc
    def time():
        reactive.invalidate_later(1)
        return datetime.now()

    @render.code
    def greeting():
        return f"Hello, world!\nIt's currently {time()}."

app = App(app_ui, server)
```

**In Shiny Express, there isn't this hard distinction** between UI and server.

Instead, everything coexists as top-level code in the app file: input components, layout directives, outputs (including their rendering logic), and reactive functions.

> Also, you aren't forced to combine your UI into a single complex object.

Reviewer: I would cut this, as part of our pitch for Core is that the UI object is simpler to read and maintain, aslo we say you can combine variables into a UI object. IMO it's enough just say that everything coexists.

Reviewer 2: It is simpler to read and maintain, and harder to write. Putting it in a single object is a downside--I felt it viscerally yesterday when porting the dashboard app.

You can use multiple UI objects, and they will be combined together by the framework.

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
# Express
from shiny import ui, render, reactive, App
import shiny.express
from datetime import datetime

ui.h1("Title")

@reactive.Calc
def time():
    reactive.invalidate_later(1)
    return datetime.now()

@render.code
def greeting():
    return f"Hello, world!\nIt's currently {time()}."
```

Again, notice how `greeting` in this app does _not_ have a corresponding call to `output_code("greeting")`.

> This is because in Shiny Express, `render` functions automatically add an output to the page---no need to do it manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because in Shiny Express, `render` functions implicitly add an output to the page as a side effect so you don't need the output function.
```

##### Core advantages

- Because the UI structure is kept separate from the server, it is easier to read, reorder, and restructure. This advantage grows as app UIs grow larger.
- Explicit server function declaration gives us a natural place to put code that should only execute at startup (top level) versus for each session (server function body). In contrast, in Express, all of the code in the app file is executed for each session.

##### Express advantages

- It's nice for beginners not to have to learn about the difference between UI and server.
- Avoids having to write code in two different places for a single output, and having to make the IDs match up.

> - No need to write nested function declarations (i.e. functions inside the server function), which can be surprising to Python programmers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- No need to write nested function declarations (i.e. functions inside the server function)
```

Reviewer: This reads as though we shipped a bad framework and are fixing it, which I don't think is what we mean

Reviewer 2: I don't read it that way, and I think taking off the second half makes it worse, not better. Your version makes it sound like nested function declarations are an inherent disadvantage, mine just says it's "surprising" to Python programmers.

    )
)

def server(input, output, session):
    @render.code
    def result():
        return f"You entered '{input.txt_in()}'."

app = App(app_ui, server)
```
:::

By contrast, **in Shiny Express, container components like `ui.sidebar()` are _context managers_**, and used via `with` statements.
Their child components go within the `with` block.

::: {.column-page-right}
```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
# Express
from shiny import render, App
from shiny.express import input, ui

with ui.sidebar():
    ui.input_text("txt_in", "Type something here:")

with ui.card():
    @render.code
    def result():
        return f"You entered '{input.txt_in()}'."
```
:::

##### Core advantages

- Passing children as arguments is beautifully simple and robust from a programming perspective.
- Containers and non-containers behave very similarly (in fact, non-containers act no different than containers with no children).
- All of the Core UI components are simple value-returning functions, without side effects. This makes them easy to compose, reuse, refactor, inspect, and test.

##### Express advantages

> - The `with` block syntax is slightly more readable, as it depends only on indentation and not on parentheses and commas.

Reviewer: I don't love more readable since we say Core is more readable in other contexts. Maybe "More familiar to many users" or "easier to write because you don't have to worry about commas"?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `with` block syntax is more forgiving to write, as you don't need to separate elements with commas. (Every Shiny Core app author has probably seen the "Perhaps you forgot a comma?" error message many times.)
```
